docs/getting-started/installation.md, before:

# Installation

## Prerequisites

| Requirement | Version | Notes                        |
| ----------- | ------- | ---------------------------- |
| **macOS**   | 12+     | Linux support planned        |
| **Python**  | 3.9+    | `python3 --version` to check |
| **Ollama**  | Latest  | Local LLM runtime            |

## Install Ollama

Drift uses [Ollama](https://ollama.com) for local LLM inference.

!!! success "Auto-Setup (default)"
**You don't need to install Ollama manually.** When you run any `drift` command for the first time, it will automatically:

    1. Install Ollama (via Homebrew on macOS, or the official script on Linux)
    2. Start the Ollama server
    3. Pull the default model (`qwen2.5-coder:1.5b`)

    To disable this, set `auto_install_ollama`, `auto_start_ollama`, or `auto_pull_model` to `false` in `~/.drift/config.json`.

If you prefer to install manually:

```bash
# macOS — download from ollama.com or:
brew install ollama

# Start Ollama
open -a Ollama    # or: ollama serve
```

Pull the default model:

```bash
ollama pull qwen2.5-coder:1.5b
```

!!! tip "Model choice"
`qwen2.5-coder:1.5b` (~1GB) is fast and works well for command generation. For better quality, try `qwen2.5-coder:7b` (~4.5GB) or `codellama:7b`.

## Install Drift CLI

=== "From Source (recommended)"

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/a-elhaag/drift-cli.git
    cd drift-cli
    pip install -e .
    ```

=== "With install script"

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/a-elhaag/drift-cli.git
    cd drift-cli
    ./install.sh
    ```

## Verify Installation

```bash
# Check everything is set up correctly
drift doctor
```

Expected output:

```
✓ Ollama is installed
✓ Ollama is running
✓ Model qwen2.5-coder:1.5b is available
  auto_install_ollama: ON
  auto_start_ollama:   ON
  auto_pull_model:     ON
✓ Drift directory exists (~/.drift)
```

## ZSH Integration (Optional)

The installer sets up a `Ctrl+Space` hotkey so you can type natural language directly in your terminal:

```bash
# If not set up automatically, add to ~/.zshrc:
source ~/.drift/drift.zsh
```

Then restart your terminal. Type a natural language query and press `Ctrl+Space`.

## Next Steps

- [Quick Start →](quickstart.md) — Try your first commands
- [Configuration →](configuration.md) — Customize Drift settings

Commit message:

docs: update system requirements and installation prerequisites for clarity

docs/getting-started/installation.md, after:

# Installation

## Prerequisites

| Requirement | Version | Notes |
| ----------- | ------- | ----- |
| **OS** | macOS 12+ or modern Linux | Windows is not supported yet |
| **Python** | 3.9+ | `python3 --version` to check |
| **Ollama** | Latest | Local LLM runtime |
| **Shell** | Any | ZSH is only needed for optional `Ctrl+Space` hotkey integration |
| **Git** | Recent | Recommended for update workflow and project-aware context |

!!! info "Install scope"
    Normal install (`pip install -e .`) only installs runtime dependencies.
    It does not install test or docs tooling.

## Install Ollama

Drift uses [Ollama](https://ollama.com) for local LLM inference.

!!! success "Auto-Setup (default)"
**You don't need to install Ollama manually.** When you run any `drift` command for the first time, it will automatically:

    1. Install Ollama (via Homebrew on macOS, or the official script on Linux)
    2. Start the Ollama server
    3. Pull the default model (`qwen2.5-coder:1.5b`)

    To disable this, set `auto_install_ollama`, `auto_start_ollama`, or `auto_pull_model` to `false` in `~/.drift/config.json`.

If you prefer to install manually:

```bash
# macOS — download from ollama.com or:
brew install ollama

# Start Ollama
open -a Ollama    # or: ollama serve
```

Pull the default model:

```bash
ollama pull qwen2.5-coder:1.5b
```

!!! tip "Model choice"
`qwen2.5-coder:1.5b` (~1GB) is fast and works well for command generation. For better quality, try `qwen2.5-coder:7b` (~4.5GB) or `codellama:7b`.

## Install Drift CLI

=== "From Source (recommended)"

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/a-elhaag/drift-cli.git
    cd drift-cli
    pip install -e .
    ```

=== "With install script"

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/a-elhaag/drift-cli.git
    cd drift-cli
    ./install.sh
    ```

    The installer script is currently macOS-focused.
    On Linux, use the source install flow.

## Verify Installation

```bash
# Check everything is set up correctly
drift doctor
```

Expected output:

```
✓ Ollama is installed
✓ Ollama is running
✓ Model qwen2.5-coder:1.5b is available
  auto_install_ollama: ON
  auto_start_ollama:   ON
  auto_pull_model:     ON
✓ Drift directory exists (~/.drift)
```

## ZSH Integration (Optional)

The installer sets up a `Ctrl+Space` hotkey so you can type natural language directly in your terminal:

```bash
# If not set up automatically, add to ~/.zshrc:
source ~/.drift/drift.zsh
```

Then restart your terminal. Type a natural language query and press `Ctrl+Space`.

## Next Steps

- [Quick Start →](quickstart.md) — Try your first commands
- [Configuration →](configuration.md) — Customize Drift settings
